JOUR 4251 
Advertising and behavior change (Principles of compliance) - Ch 7 part 1
Principles of compliance 
Compliance 
= doing the behavior; giving in; doing it because it has been requested You see social influence everywhere: 
Infomercials, social media, direct mail, traditional advertisement 
In Chapter 7, we are thinking about situations where the attitude doesn’t  matter. It’s the behavior that does.
Social influence 
We are talking about social influence without pressure Tactics used to foster compliance are:  
● Closeness: in space and time 
● Specificity: buy a particular product, donate to a specific charity Refer to immediate action or choice environment 
Do NOT result in long-term behavior choices - affects singular behavior 
Automaticity is often cited as the reason compliance occurs.  You don’t think. You just agree. 
Social influence relies on techniques that are subtle and outside of  conscious awareness.
Scripts 
Knowledge structures about sequence of events. Examples 
Restaurant: Fancy restaurant vs. fast food restaurant Bus: checking in when entering vs. exiting 
We do not pay attention - we are mindless during scripts
Copier experiment 
“Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the Xerox Machine?” 
“Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the Xerox Machine because I am in a  rush?” 
“Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the Xerox machine because I have  to make copies?” 
Least effort principle 
You only pay attention if it is worth your while to (motivated). 
This doesn’t work for big favors.  
Then, real excuse is mildly effective. Fake one not.
Heuristics 
Another knowledge structure that helps simplify complex decisions Sufficiency principle 
Tendency to strike a balance between minimizing cognitive effort and  satisfying motivational concerns  
(when not motivated; you don’t put effort in)
Who is going to win the tournament?
Recognition Heuristic 
Function of just recognizing the stimulus 
We want to be efficient. This is an efficient way of not thinking. How can you apply this to advertising?
Principles of compliance
What’s next? 
● Continue reading Chapter 7 
● Assignment #4 on behavior is due by April 23