JOUR 4251 
Psychology of Advertising 
3.2 Memory 
Make sure to get an In-Class Assignment form before class starts and  
write down your name on the form.
Recap Tuesday 
● Focal attention 
○ Categorization 
○ Representativeness heuristic ○ Pioneering advantage 
○ Assimilation / contrast 
○ Brand personality 
● Comprehension 
○ Omit comparisons 
○ Pragmatic inferences 
○ Affirmation of the consequent ○ Juxtaposition 
● Elaboration 
○ Self schema 
○ Meta-cognition
Memory 
What do we remember? Do you remember ads you have seen? In-Class Assignment: Question 1
Memory 
RECORD - STORE - RETRIEVE - information from the senses Encoding 
Is getting information from external stimulus into an internal  representation that allows us to retain it in the cognitive system
Memory Storage means to retain the information over time 
PUSHING SAVE on file 
Can be short-term; Can be long-term
Retrieval refers to the processes that allow us to find the information  stored in memory.  
Forgetting is a set of processes that prevent us from finding it. 
The Multi-store model of memory
Sensory memory 
All senses have memory registers 
You can retain it for 18-20 seconds before  it either goes away or moves into short-term  memory 
D R K N S K F W P N X R
Short-term memory (working memory) 
Input from different senses gets integrated with items from long-term  memory 
Held in conscious awareness 
Information can be manipulated 
Limited storage ability - it is active and you are consciously aware of it 
Verbal rehearsal lengthens the time it stays in short-term and builds up the  trace in long-term
Memory test (Question 2)
Memory test (Question 2) 
Nine Swap Cell Ring Key Plugs Lamp Apple Table Sway Army Bank Fire Hold Worm Clock Horse Color Baby Sword Desk Keep Find Bird Rock
Memory test (Question 2)
Long-term memory 
Unlimited amounts of information 
Needs to be encoded semantically or conceptually in order to enter  long-term memory 
The more you rehearse, the more it is in long-term memory
Controversy 
That short-term and long-term are different 
Evidence for multi-storage system 
● Speed of retrieval: faster to retrieve from short-term rather than  long-term memory 
● Capacity: You can’t store as much in short-term than in long-term ● Primacy and recency effects: You remember first and last best ● Different forms of storing the information: encoding process ● Amnesia patients
Problems with multi-storage system 1. Always need to go through short-term memory? 
2. Sometimes people don’t remember something that they have seen  thousands of times:
Question 3 
Draw from memory: - The map of the world OR 
- A one dollar bill
Q4: another memory test! 
Answer the following questions: 
1. What words did we categorize in the previous class? 2. In what colors were “IPhone” and “Red” written in the word cloud?
Depth of processing 
It is not just about repetition. It is also about the level of processing. Remembering comes from processing deeply, rather than superficially. 
Thus, depending on what you (are asked to) do with the information can  affect how deeply you process it. 
RIVER: Is the word in capital letters? 
HOUSE: Does the word rhyme with mouse? 
WINE: Does the word fit in the sentence: “The man drank a glass of….”
What’s next? 
The following things are due February 13 (before class starts!): ● Submit reading response 3 on Chapter 3 (memory) 
● Assignment 2 (attention) 
○ Hand in on Canvas: Upload Word/PDF document 
● Let us know whether you need a laptop for Exam 1 ○ Email your TA