JOUR 4251 
Psychology of Advertising 
5.2 Attitudes (Cont.) 
Make sure to get an In-Class Assignment form before class starts and  
write down your name on the form. 
Please share with the person next to you (groups of 2-3)
Recap Tuesday 
● Why do people hold attitudes? ○ Adjustment function 
○ Value-expressive function ○ Ego-defensive function ○ Knowledge function 
● Attitude strength 
○ Accessibility 
○ Importance 
○ Knowledge 
○ Certainly 
○ Ambivalence
Attitude formation vs attitude change 
Formation  
You don’t have an existing attitude; issue is novel. Lower effort, not as much elaboration 
Attitude change  
You are changing an existing attitude. 
Takes more cognitive effort.
Attitude formation 
Attitudes formed from direct experiences are more predictive of future  behavior than ones formed from indirect experience. 
Cognitive 
● Heuristics 
Affective 
● Mere exposure 
● Classical and evaluative conditioning 
Behavior 
● Self-perception 
● Reinforcement
Heuristics 
The use of quick associations - cues, stereotypes - in forming attitudes  toward products, communicated in ads. 
Examples 
Brand name (brand image) 
Consumer version of stereotyping 
Brand equity: the value added to the product by the brand name Country of origin / location 
Price
Mere exposure If you show it a lot, your product will be more positively rated 
- Is more familiar / becomes accessible 
- Easier to process 
- Processing fluency 
BUT 
Wear-out effect: when too much repetition results in consumers becoming  increasingly negative toward the message 
Alternative explanation for liking
Classical and evaluative conditioning 
Pavlov’s dogs 
Unconditioned stimulus (food) 
Conditioned stimulus (sound) 
Anticipation 
Effect fades in the absence 
of the unconditioned stimulus.
How does this work in advertising? 
● ‘Expectation’? 
○ Pavlov 
● Misattribution? 
○ Attribute positive  
feeling to product 
● Association? 
Feeling remains in the  
absence of signal.
Behavior 
Self-perception 
“I recycled the bottle, so I must care about the environment” “I drink a lot of pepsi. Thus, I must like this brand” => only when you have little information 
Reinforcement 
How do you feel about brand X? 
Positive (GOOD) or negative reaction 
Positive reinforcement results in more stronger attitudes
Think like an advertiser (1) 
You want to use an ad to help form a positive  attitude toward your brand
Goals 
Cognitive representations of desired end states What you want. Can be abstract or more specific. 
Be happy, be healthy, buy food for dinner To be adopted as a goal, it needs to be: 
● Desirable 
● Attainable 
● Improvement from current state
Goals 
Behavioral intention: get food for dinner 
Implementation intention (how?): purchase these three items from a  particular supermarked at 4 PM today 
Focal goal: actively pursue + consciously aware 
Background goal: might influence goal pursuit, but not explicitly aware of it  at that time
Goals in buying 
● Utilitarian goals: things you need; practical. I need toothpaste so I buy  toothpaste 
● Self-expression goals: I wear designer clothes 
People differ individually on whether they buy stuff for utilitarian or  self-expression purposes. 
And, the goals differ by product.
Goals in buying 
● Identity goals: this product helps me to be the person I want to be ● Hedonic goals: no purpose other than pleasure; candy, jewelry 
Implications for advertisers: 
What goals are your customers holding when create your ad? Aligning your ad with one of these goals. 
Match = more favorable thoughts.
Think like an advertiser (2) 
● Pick a product 
● Decide what purchasing goal your customers would likely hold ○ Utilitarian 
○ Self-expression 
○ Identity-building 
○ Hedonic 
● Come up with an advertising concept (an idea of how to sell your  product, slogan, campaign idea) that responds to that goal ● Show how the product fits
What’s next? 
● Review session on Tuesday 
● Exam 1 on Thursday (in class) 
The week after the exam: 
● Assignment #3 due by March 5 before class starts